---
layout: creative
title: Amy Tan Identifying Issues with Feminine Identity
author: Priyam S.
editor: Hattie W.

---
In the book, _The Joy Luck Club_, some issues that Amy Tan addresses for multiple families are the identity of women in the face of their culture and future and past generations. For example, Lindo realizes that her family is going to leave her to a family she has never seen. Lindo decides that she will agree and listen to her parents, but will also live her own life, “I had on a beautiful red dress, but what I saw was even more valuable. I was strong. I was pure. I had genuine thoughts inside that no one could see, that no one could ever take away from me. I was like the wind. I threw my head back and smiled proudly to myself. And then I draped the large embroidered red scarf over my face and covered these thoughts up. But underneath the scarf I still knew who I was. I made a promise to myself. I would always remember my parents’ wishes, but I would never forget myself'” (Tan 58). Lindo believes that she needs to make sure that she lives up to the cultural expectations, while not sacrificing her own life. However, this situation is not isolated to this family, the idea of identity is seen in multiple scenarios. Ying-ying has been told when she was young, that she has to hide her desires and her expectations in life and this also has been affecting the future generation. Her daughter says, “All these years I kept my true nature hidden, running along like a small shadow so nobody could catch me. And because I moved so secretly now my daughter does not see me. She sees a list of things to buy, her checkbook out of balance, her ashtray sitting crooked on a straight table” (Tan 67). Ying-ying shows that her past and her interaction with the past generations and cultural aspects have shaped her identity with her daughter. When she says that her daughter’s ashtray sits crooked on a straight table, it means that she believes that her daughter’s personality seems unacceptable to her from her cultural standards. It also says that she has kept her true nature hidden and that shows she has not shown her identity and seems that even her own daughter wouldn’t see it. The theme of identity impacts the families of Ying-ying and Lindo because it impacts how their families act. Waverly, Lindo’s daughter, is seen to never sacrifice anything. For example, when Lindo and Waverly went to An-mei’s house for the crab dinner, her four-year-old daughter got the biggest crab from Waverly. Amy Tan using multiple scenarios with multiple families is showing the importance of feminine identity to the reader, showing how some small ideas or gestures told to anyone of their identity may just affect their whole lives and the lives around them.