---
layout: creative
title: Gender Gaps in The Absolutely Diary of a Part-time Indian
author: 'Jacqueline L. '
editor: Ms. BC

---
    	The varied treatment of men and women has been evident since the beginning of time.  More often than not in history, men were treated as priorities in society, thus shifting much of the focus to them while the women are overlooked. In this case, literature is no exception. In The Absolutely Diary of a Part-time Indian by Sherman Alexie, the author critiques the concept of masculinity, but abstains from doing so with female characters thus, indirectly upholding misogynistic stereotypes.
    	
        In the novel, Alexie normalizes the over-sexualization of females through the drastic contrast between Junior’s relationships with males and females. One of these differences and perhaps the most prominent one throughout the book is that of Junior’s childhood best friend, Rowdy, and what eventually becomes his semi-girlfriend, Penelope. Since the beginning of the book, Rowdy is immediately shown to have an extremely close-knit bond with Junior. Yet, Alexie demonstrates how despite this friendship, huge barriers exist between the two characters in the form of toxic masculinity. After his first few days at Reardan, Junior recalls a memory with Rowdy in which he makes a confession about his crush at the time. Trying to confide in his best friend, he even goes as far as to mention that he’s in love with the girl that he describes, which Rowdy ignores and pretends not to hear:
    	
        
        “Come on, Rowdy, I’m trying to tell you something major.” 
    	
        “You’re just being stupid…[Dawn] doesn’t give a shit about you, “ he said. And that made me cry...I cry because I’m crying. It’s weak. It’s the opposite of warrior. 
    	
        “Quit crying,” Rowdy said. 
    	
        “I can’t help it,” I said. “I love her more than I’ve ever loved anybody.” 
    	
        “Please,” Rowdy said. “Stop that bawling, okay?” I wiped my face with one of my pillows and threw it across the room. 
    	
        “Jesus, you’re a wimp,” Rowdy said (75). 
    	
        Rowdy is seen deferring Junior’s emotions, implying weakness and a lack of manhood. In such instances, as well as many others like it, the author highlights how emotions and the expression of those feelings are limited due to societal standards that suggest men should not display emotion. The critique, as shown through examples with Rowdy and Junior, among others, is one that is extremely powerful. Through his use of word choice such as “weak” and “wimp,” the writer ensures that this toxicity is noticed by readers. On the other hand, the critique of traditional gender stereotypes are not even remotely explored when it comes to male-female interactions. As Junior becomes accustomed to the people in his new school, he attends one of the girl’s school volleyball games in which Penelope is playing. Currently, Junior expresses his feelings for her, but keeps his distance considering that they aren’t necessarily friends yet. However, this does not prevent him from admiring from afar. 
    	
        Yesterday, during a game, Penelope was serving the ball and I watched her like she was a work of art. She was wearing a white shirt and white shorts, and I could see the outlines of her white bra and white panties. Her skin was pale white. Milky white. Cloud white. So she was all white on white, like the most perfect kind of vanilla dessert cake you’ve ever seen. I wanted to be her chocolate topping...I just wanted to watch the sweaty Penelope sweat her perfect sweat on the perfectly sweaty day (114). 
    	
        In this graphic description, Junior notes nearly every feature of Penelope and each of her motions, down to the colors and outlines of her underclothes.  The list of admirations continues for another page until Junior almost faints when Penelope serves the ball against the opposing team. The writer unpacks a lot in this chunk of Junior’s internal monologue which some may see as borderline disturbing and stalkerish. This over-sexualization of Penelope and other females is one that occurs a variety of times, ranging from Junior’s detailed fantasies to him receiving erections at the very glimpse of females. The scene as a whole raises the question of where one should draw the line between romantically gazing at a crush and intensely glaring at a girl’s body without her knowledge. These examples depict just one of many cases in which Alexie problematizes conventional ideas regarding masculinity but blatantly ignores the overly-sexualized way in which females are portrayed throughout the novel.
    	
        In addition, Alexie affirms controversial stereotypes about women by the different ways in which he introduces both male and female characters.  This distinction can be made between Junior’s encounter with Reardan staff such as his basketball coach and the school secretary. In the middle of the book, Junior’s father encourages him to try out for Reardan’s junior varsity basketball team. Junior eventually gives in and attends tryouts where he is met by the coach. The tone of the passage instantly changes as Junior describes how he and the boys reacted to his entry. “We all shot basketballs for a while. And then Coach stepped onto the court. Forty kids IMMEDIATELY stopped bouncing and shooting and talking. We were silent, SNAP, just like that” (137).  In this passage, the coach is depicted as a respectable and authoritative figure who produces order without even needing to speak. Furthermore, in Junior’s annotations of his sketch of the coach, he notes that he had a “voice like Thor,” drawing reference to a powerful superhero. Suddenly, the boys were tamed by this masculine character and would strive to impress him for the remainder of the chapter. This overall positive encounter with a brand new, male character differs significantly from that of female characters. Namely, when Junior is in class, he is called out by Reardan’s secretary, Miss Warren. 
    	
        She suddenly started crying. Weeping. Just like these big old whopping tears. I thought she was going to fall over on the floor and start screaming and kicking like a two-year-old...She hugged me hard, And I have to admit that it felt pretty dang good. Miss Warren was, like, fifty years old, but she was still pretty hot. She was all skinny and muscular because she jogged all the time. So I sort of, er, physically reacted to her hug (201). 
    	
        Within the first few lines, Junior compares the secretary to a crying child which can also be interpreted as a sign of weakness and being overly dramatic, as women are often portrayed. Following this remark, he proceeds to sexualize Miss Warren over something as simple as a hug, focusing on her “muscular,” “hot,” appearance. This representation of a female character, along with the normalization of gender stereotypes heavily contrasts with how the coach was generally presented as: the well-respected, influential man versus the hot, yet very emotional secretary. Interestingly, this is not the only point in the novel at which characters of opposite genders are being portrayed in this way.Furthermore, Alexie’s fails to include a powerful, self-sufficient female that does not fall subject to being sexualized by the narrator. While the novel heavily criticizes toxic masculinity in an attempt to empower males, female characters are completely dismissed and even degraded by the majority of comments made by the author.
    	
        In conclusion, it is clear that representation of both genders and their respective flaws in the book are far from equal. With time, advancements have been made to correct this gap in our society, but there is still a long way to go. There are various instances in which Alexie portrays males as superior to females, specifically the level analysis surrounding male bonds and how certain characters are introduced compared to their female counterparts.  All of which poses the question-- did the author intentionally choose to unfulfill the potential of female characters throughout the book? Did he knowingly embrace toxic female stereotypes as they would be through the eyes of his narrator? More importantly, what is to be made of Alexie’s views on the behavior of teenage boys in society and whether or not it is acceptable based on the sole fact that they are boys.