---
layout: story
title: Iced Coffee at 4:30 AM
author: Rommy S.
editor: Thanjila T.

---
    	In the darkness, Matt stood up and paced across the room to the Keurig crouching defenseless against the wall. He removed the tepid mug and placed it in the minifridge besides the half-eaten container of Top Ramen he had had for dinner. Matt receded back into his chair, which creaked from under him, momentarily disturbing the tranquility of the surrounding darkness. Matt clawed across the desk for his phone and glanced at the time. It was already 4 AM and he was at 56 percent. The phone’s heat permeated through his fingers as it dissolved into the suffocating warmth of the room. It was a sickeningly warm wave of boredom, warping around Matt’s neck, choking him with unattainable drowsiness.

    	His first night alone had been a failure. Matt had tried to sleep, but the coldness of his pillow faded quickly, leaving him writhing between sheets. Matt finally fought back, kicking the offending blanket to the foot of his bed. Soon enough, he realized how vulnerable this left him to the shadow spreading itself across his floor. It was a pile of stacked boxes containing some wrinkled clothes, old furniture, and memories of the moments where time moved just slightly faster. Eventually, Matt relented and sat at his computer, the hostile brightness scratching at his retinas.

    	On his screen, Matt had pulled up the paper that was due the first week of the new semester, so this Friday. Despite this, his mind felt soft, getting carried away by the music from a passing car. When this paper was finished, Matt promised himself he would get a macchiato from the deli he noticed while helping the movers unload his boxes from their truck. That time would come eventually. At various moments throughout the night, Matt’s head would jerk towards his bedroom door in anticipation of the familiar, pounding footsteps crescendoing towards his room. But it wasn’t the door and it wasn’t his room. It was a stack of dusty cardboard boxes in the middle of a studio apartment with a broken air conditioner. He was alone and debating whether to be reassured or disappointed by this fact.

    	Matt's thoughts had wandered off until now. He had not yet slept and now it was too late. He hadn’t been productive. Everyone was always doing something, getting ahead somehow, but Matt was stuck in vicious laziness. Outside the drawn blinds, he could only make out the laughter of a group of cacophonous drunks stumbling about on the barren pavement. At least they had something to drink for.

    	Matt turned off his computer and sighed to the sound of its fans slowing to a faint hum. He cautiously shifted his weight to his feet and opened the blinds, letting in the gentle aura of the night. Matt opened the fridge and became momentarily blinded by its brightness. In between dark, purple stains he fished out his coffee mug, which was now friendly and refreshing in his hand. Matt forced his window open and felt the July air wash into his apartment. Carefully, he climbed out onto the fire escape, carrying his mug with him, wary as not to spill. Matt leaned against the railing and sipped his coffee, the wind running its fingers through his hair. A warm, pink light began to crack from between the wispy clouds. Matt just stood there, watching the sunrise as it welcomed in another day, and with it, the opportunity to start again.